Can you share your playlist with me?
The playlists I use are more than mere collections of music. Each one is intended to be a transformative journey. Each song has been carefully listened to many times and weighed to see if it serves the intent of the journey. This process of song selection and putting together a playlist takes place over weeks. It is my life’s work, so though I am happy to share the name of individual songs that spoke to you, I prefer not to share the whole playlist.


How do you put a playlist together?
First I become still.  There are many ways to practice stillness - some people walk in nature, some people draw, some cook or do woodwork or some other activity that keeps the hands busy but stills the mind. I like to wallow in water and meditate (not at the same time - I’ve tried that and it doesn’t work). Whenever I become still I find that  I am moved into a space where I can hear the whispers of the Creative Divine.


My task in putting together a playlist is at once simple and complex.  Listening to the different pieces of music is simple and enjoyable, but putting it together is more complex. I have to ask if each piece of music serves the whole. I have to set aside what my ego wants and focus on the particular creative journey that is trying to come into existence. An image, theme, or idea rises up like a dream and just like a dream it can slip away. When inspiration comes I have to work as much as I can. When I do, the music forms takes shape around the theme of the journey as if by magic. The challenge is to allow my rational thinking mind to step aside so that my intuitive mind can take over. 


Why do you encourage touch?
We are kinesthetic creatures; from infancy we learn about who we are and what the world is like through whole body interaction with our environment.  Touch is a vehicle of relationship and it is in relationship that we learn so many of the deeper truths of our emotional and spiritual selves.


We live in a society and culture where touch is very regulated. We can hug but not for too long.  We can scratch a back, but only if it is a partner or your child’s back. We can lean into someone, but only if it’s a good friend and only when we’re laughing together.  For men touch is even less sanctioned, stopping often at hand shakes.  I believe we need touch in order to be happy and healthy.  Deep Dance creates a safe space to explore that.


What about boundaries?
Setting your own and respecting other people’s boundaries is an important skill.  When boundaries are too diffuse - anyone can come into your space, and when they are too rigid, no one can get close to you. Both of these states are problematic for the dance of intimacy. 


When you violate other people’s boundaries you will be pushed away again and again and feel the pain of rejection without understanding where it comes from.  If you never approach others or push them away too easily you will struggle with a sense of isolation and alienation. 


Deep Dance creates an opportunity for you to explore the edge of your boundaries and to see what lies there.    


Just like in life, maintaining your boundaries is your own responsibility at all times.  Deep Dance Light Spirit does not create a permissive space.  Maintaining and respecting boundaries is the responsibility of every individual. Do not relinquish your sense of what is good and right and appropriate for you at any given moment.  


What can you do if someone crosses your boundaries?  You can put more distance between yourself and the other person by moving away, and if that does not work, you can bow out of the dance.  If someone violates boundaries repeatedly, please tell me.


Why is there no talking allowed on the dance floor?
Talking moves you out of your body and into your head. We want to stay in our bodies as much as possible during the journeys.


Why do you have an opening and closing ritual?
Ritual is a way to come into the present moment. We all have busy complicated inner and outer lives. In order to learn something we have to be still.  Ritual is a way to invite stillness and awareness into the process.  I light a candle to the spirit of dance and we tone together  for a few seconds.  Toning is singing a simple sound like “aaaah” or “oooo” or “oooohm”. I believe that sound augurs healing. We dance to music that others have made. But we should remember that we, too, with our own voices and with every action that we take, are instruments of healing in our own lives and in the lives of others. Toning is a way to bring that into our awareness.
